---
title: Burroughs' Junky
---

I just finished William Burroughs' *Junky* and thoroughly 'enjoyed' it.
Compared to *Naked Lunch*, which I did not manage to finish, this little book
is eminently readable.
Whenever reading or watching something about *junk*, I get this tense feeling
in my wrists, a kind of strictly somatic fear of needles. I had this all the
time during my reading of Junky, despite there only rarely occurring explicit
descriptions of getting a shot.
Junk is endlessly fascinating, and the book is an invaluable resource for those
unwilling and unprepared to slip in the misery of 'developing a habit'.

As in Céline (and sometimes, but much more vaguely, Hugo Claus), the visceral,
biologi(sti)cal aspect of Burroughs' writing strikes me in particular.
Burroughs studied a
bit of medicine in Vienna, and one can feel this peculiar, slightly perverse,
nauseating fascination with the *living* body shared by a certain breed of
medical doctors. When Burroughs says that
every cell in the junky's body is hungry for junk, that 'kicking a habit' is
the replacement of junk-dependent cells by 'normal' cells... it appears as if
we are in some sort of 19th century medicine textbook.
He's as much a beat poet as junk-scientist. Junk, it seems, makes
one appreciate what the *body* means, what it can do, and most of all, what it
*desires* or *wills*.

But there is more to the book, there is the lawless self-organization of the
community of junkies, a community which is formed spontaneously and
unwillingly, or perhaps strictly in accordance with the will of the
junk-dependent cells.
Criminality (and I do not refer to drug offenses) gets a whole different feel
to it in the context of junkies and the will of their junk-dependent cells set
out to score.
The junk-dependent communities in the book seem to have a vague feel of
anarchism, of free, loose, and precarious networks of association between
individuals -- but where this free-ness is tinged by junk-dependentness, distrust
and inescapable paranoia, as well as a 'natural' order of things 
which is hardly anarchical (in which the pushers, pigeons, lush workers, *etc.*
are some of the operational taxonomic units).
There are also the individuals, whose individuality is severely 'reduced' in a
way, but never completely erased by the junk-dependentness.
Somewhere in the extreme bodily dependence and attachment, a spiritual
detachment occurs, an escape from the self, perhaps a different way to the far
east.
