---
layout: post
title: What am I doing
---

>"Undo [...] You're trying too hard" - Bj&ouml;rk

Reading autobiographical sketches of various scientists and artists is something I find quite an enjoyable thing to do. However, it has often struck me that most of those interesting people (claim to have) had some kind of early vocation to their life goals, something I am unable to specify in my own case. It seems at least probable (awaiting further empirical support) that such a clear vocation is a prerequisite or at least catalyst for doing innovative things in one's life.

I do not think that being an interesting innovator is that noble a goal in itself. Indeed such a goal might be mainly driven by some latent and desperate desire for fame and recognition. So, since I am not able to find some early childhood calling towards biology, how can I rationalize my goals as a scientist? What, apart from the all too human desire for glory and acknowledgement, could drive my current dedication to biological science? Am I merely trying to establish some particular position in our society? Or is there some, arguably more noble, goal? I feel this question is of outstanding importance. But indeed, the importance of this question is of course itself questionable.

What about the typical, perhaps often apocryphal, childhood 'early-onset' fascination for something, be it living things, stones, stars, music or pictures? Am I unable to find some compelling story about why I happen to have become a biologist (or more specialized, bioinformatician and evolutionary biologist)? Of course I enjoyed animals and plants when I was a kid, perhaps I even read a booklet or two, and I certainly liked to draw them. However I wasn't a voracious collector of beetles or shells, neither the kind of kid that asked where all these animals came from. Later I did got interested in evolutionary biology, but perhaps more stemming from the typical aversion from religion that was so common among me and my friends when we were 16, and the fact that some of the more 'popular' atheist intellectuals tend to be  a particular flavor of evolutionary biologists. Nevertheless, it ignited an interest in biology for its own sake, and that must have convinced me to study biology back then.

But the choice for biology in my case (actually initially molecular biology and biochemistry) did not coincide with the choice for science. I was already convinced to become a scientist before I chose biology as a discipline. There can be no case of a childhood vocation for biology. Surely, some greater affinity and interest for living things than for inanimate matter or mathematics steered me into that direction, but I feel that doesn't count. So perhaps it is more fruitful in my case to look for some calling to become a scientist, when did that happen?

Actually, there seems to be an equally dead end down that road, since I actually wanted to study philosophy! Philosophy exerted a much stronger attractive force to me than science when I was a teenager. Perhaps it was the typical 'philosophy starts from wonder' adagium that seemed right to me. I started reading some philosophers, and of course I was unable to understand most of it. However, I was able to understand the relevant wikipedia pages. Eventually, it turned out that the analytic philosophers and the mainstream philosophy of science exerted most influence on me, and when my parents didn't want to see me study philosophy, I turned to science. Many of those philosophers seemed to imply that philosophy was only a servant or critical sidenote to contemporary science anyway. Of course, today I don't think about it that way, and I know that many analytic philosophers would not dare proclaim such a thing. However it is not hard to get such an impression from an unmentored teenager's overview of contemporary philosophy.

Is that it? A lame story about why I studied science as a surrogate for philosophy? I hope it's not. There rests one road to look down, why did the promise of philosophy, a life of contemplation and asking of questions that are at first sight exceedingly abstract and irrelevant, exerted such an attractive force to me? When I start thinking about this, I can only find one satisfying explanation analogous to the childhood vocation of so many scientists and artists. That is a search for an aesthetic life. I have had many strong aesthetic experiences for as long as I recall and have always been immensely overwhelmed and impressed by the effect of those moments. These fundamentally *aesthetic* moments have been accompanied by some paradoxically vague feeling of deep understanding. It has always seemed to me that these experiences provide a glimpse of some possibility of enlightenment, itself to be found in a deep understanding of the world. It seems that paradise is where beauty and understanding meet; as a state of clear aesthetic appreciation, found most expressively in contemplation and understanding, be it of art, nature or a mathematical proposition. I am inclined to conclude, that apart from many contingent and psychological factors, this desire for an aesthetic life is a main driving force for my current dedication to science. It is seemingly not so much about accomplishing something particular, but more about reaching an unattainable state of perpetual insightful contemplation while living one's life. It seems to me pretty much akin to Aristotelian metaphysics, *i.e.* an inherent desire to understand, not for practical purposes (*i.e.* technology), but for the sheer beauty of clarity and understanding. One most fully realizes the essence of being human by contemplating essences, and this is something science *ought* to do.

But gradually, it dawns more and more on me that I am meeting science in a terribly ugly condition. An ugliness in both theoretical foundations, scientific practice and societal organization. This presents me with a challenge, indeed a big and interesting one, to pursue a life in science, while retaining beauty.
