---
title: quotations
---


"I would say that imagination is a form of memory. Down Plato, down good
dog. An image depends on the power of association and association is supplied
and prompted by memory. When we speak of a vivid individual recollection we
are paying a compliment not to our capacity of retention but to Mnemosyne's
mysterious foresight in having stored up this or that element which creative
imagination may use when combining it with later recollections and inventions.
In this sense, both memory and imagination are a negation of time." Nabokov,
quoted in
[Yates](https://scholarworks.umt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4075&context=etd)

"Now if one is perfectly honest with oneself there is nothing extraordinary
in the tendency to give to the manners and clothes of a distant day (which
happens to be placed in the future) an old-fashioned tinge, a badly pressed
badly groomed, dusty something, since the terms 'out of date', 'not of our age'
and so on are in the long run the only ones in which we are able to imagine
and express a strangeness no amount of research can foresee. The future is but
the obsolete in reverse." Nabokov - Lance

"In natural history, all possible things happen sometimes; you generally do not                          
support your favoured phenomenon by declaring rivals impossible in theory"
Gould and Lewontin 1979, p. 151

"Evolvability is the genome's ability to produce adaptive variants when acted
upon by the genetic system. This is not to say that the variants need to be
"directed" (Foster and Cairns 1992) for there to be evolvability, but rather,
that they cannot be entirely "misdirected," that there must be some small
chance of a variant being adaptive. The situation is analogous to obtaining a
verse of Shakespeare from monkeys banging away on typewriters. Typewriters make
this far more likely than if the monkeys had pencil and paper. The type-
writers at least constrain them to produce strings of letters.  Similarly, the
genotype-phenotype map constrains the directions of phenotypic change
resulting from genetic variation." Wagner & Altenberg

"Indeed they can never provide a system of explanation as logically water-tight
as is given by purely rationalistic theories which invoke special fersgs-sugtr
as those Dr Pangloss was so fond of-to deal with each type of process."
(Waddington, the nature of Life) Would SJG have found his inspiration here?

"I grew my own body... Nobody else did it for me. So if I grew it, I must have
known how to grow it." J. D. Salinger, Teddy, 1953

"It is not merely a maer of tactical convenience to separately iden-                                    
tify the three foci [the program, the hardware, the physics]. Even though, as
they say, it’s all in the head, this logical separation induces an acceleration
of symbolic traffic between these foci whose richness, vitality, and potential
is exceeded in human experience only by the evolution of life itself." Sussman
& Abelson (SICP)

"Het komt bij dieren ook voor", "Oh ja?", "Jawel", "Welk dier in het
bijzonder?" [kijkt/wijst naar de kat], "Hij is geloof ik homoseksueel. Wel,
katholiek in elk geval." [Gerard Reve (31:40)
](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nsUntOEH8bc&t=2037s)

"How is it then that there is so much dispute? It is customary to suppose that
this is satisfactorily accounted for by uttering the one word 'complexity' --
even by those who assure us in the next breath that growth is a 'simple
physico-chemical process'."  J. H. Woodger (1930!)

"The texture of Space is not that of Time, and the piebald four-dimensional
sport that is bred by relativists is a quadruped with one leg replaced by the
ghost of a leg." Nabokov - Ada or Ardor p.423

"The format is deliberately space-delimited (rather than tab-delimited) and
justified into aligned columns, so these files are suitable both for automated
parsing and for human examination. I feel that tab-delimited data files are
difficult for humans to examine and spot check. For this reason, I think
tab-delimited files are a minor evil in the world. Although I occasionally
receive shrieks of outrage about this, I still stubbornly feel that
space-delimited files are just as easily parsed as tab-delimited files." Sean
Eddy

"The kind of people who become programmers and developers have ‘fun’ when the
effort they have to put out to do a task challenges them, but is just within
their capabilities. ‘Fun’ is therefore a sign of peak efficiency." Eric S.
Raymond

"[...] the infringement of one of humanity's main rights - that of enjoying
the liberty of its evolution, a liberty no other creature had ever known." (I
think Taleb?)

"La science de la réalité ne se contente plus du 'comment' phénoménologique ;
elle cherche le 'pourquoi' mathématique." - Gaston Bachelard 

"[...] to turn Merton on his head, the uniformity of nature presupposes
universalism among scientists, rather than the reverse." Lorraine Daston - The
moral economy of science

"Yet Poisson reserved the traditional term "probability" for its traditional
definition as "the reason we have to believe that [an event] will or will not
occur" [36, 30], letting "chance" designate "events in themselves and
independent of the knowledge we have of them" [36, 31]. So, for example, the
"chances" of heads or tails for a given coin are unlikely to be equal because
of the physical asymmetries of all such objects, but the "probability" is
nonetheless equal because we know nothing about the coin's constitution. For
Poisson, both the "chance" of underlying causes and the "probability" of our
ignorance were equally legitimate interpretations of what it was that
mathematical probabilities measured." Lorraine Daston - How Probabilities Came
to Be Objective and Subjective

"The study of the cell has on the whole seemed to widen rather than to narrow
the enormous gap that separates even the lowest forms of life from the
inorganic world" E.B. Wilson (1897) (quoted in Bergson EC p. 36)

"The variations come first, the organisms to the best they can with them, and
natural selection is the arbiter (Darwin)" (Sewall Wright - 1949)

"En fait, il est vrai, les mutations sont souvent des monstruosités. Mais, au
regard de la vie, y a-t-il des monstruosités ? Que sont beaucoup de formes
vivant encore aujourd'hui, et bien vivantes, sinon des monstres normalisés?"
Canguilhem, Le concept et la vie (p222)

"[W]hen sophistication loses content then the only way of keeping in touch
with reality is to be crude and superficial. This is what I intend to be.[23]"
Feyerabend (defend society against science)

"The existence of monsters calls into question the capacity of life to teach
us order. This calling into question is immediate-so comprehensive was our
prior confidence, so firmly accustomed had we been to seeing wild roses
blooming on rosebushes, tadpoles turning into frogs, mares suckling foals,
and, in general, the same engender the same. A breach in this confidence, a
morphological divergence, an appearance equivocal as to its species is enough
for us to be gripped by radical fear. Very well for fear, one might say. But
why radical fear? Because we are living beings, real effects of the laws of
life, and ourselves possible sources of life in our turn. A failure of life is
of double concern to us, for such a failure could touch us or could come from
us. *It is only because we humans are living beings that a morphological
failure is, to our living eyes, a monster. If we were beings of pure reason,
pure intellectual machines of observation, calculation, and explana­tion, and
thus inert and indifferent to the occasions of our thinking, then the monster
would be merely what is other than the same, an order other than the most
probable order.*" Georges Canguilhem

"What is important here is that racism, inscribed as one of the modern state’s
basic techniques of power, allows enemies to be treated as threats, not
political adversaries." ([Wikipedia on Foucault's 'Society must be defended'
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foucault%27s_lectures_at_the_Coll%C3%A8ge_de_France))

"Should one then turn around the formula and say that politics is war 
pursued by other means?" Foucault

"Biologists should realize that before long we shall have a subject which might
be called ‘protein taxonomy ‘-the study of the amino acid sequences of the
proteins of an organism and the comparison of them between species.  It can be
argued that these sequences are the most delicate expression possible of the
phenotype of an organism and that vast amounts of evolutionary information may
be hidden away within them." - Crick (On protein synthesis)

"While all these really exciting uses were being made of statistics, the
majority of statisticians themselves, led by Sir R.A. Fisher, were tying their
hands behind their backs, insisting that statistics couldn't be used in any but
totally reproducible situations and then only using the empirical data." 
David Mumford (2000)

"As a mathematical discipline travels far from its empirical source, or still
more, if it is a second or third generation only indirectly inspired by ideas
coming from “reality,“it is beset with very grave dangers. It becomes more and
more purely aestheticizing, more and more purely l’art pour l’art. This need
not be bad, if the field is surrounded by correlated subjects, which still have
closer empirical connections, or if the discipline is under the influence of
men with an excep- tionally well-developed taste. But there is a grave danger
that the subject will develop along the line of least resistance, that the
stream, so far from its source, will separate into a multitude of insignificant
branches, and that the discipline will become a disorganized mass of details
and complexities. In other words, at a great distance from its empirical
source, or after much “abstract” inbreeding, a mathematical subject is in
danger of degeneration." John Von Neumann

"Just as deduction should be supplemented by intuition, so the impulse to
progressive generalization must be tempered and balanced by respect and love
for colorful detail. The individual problem should not be degraded to the
rank of special illustration of lofty general theories. In fact, general
theories emerge from consideration of the specific, and they are meaningless
if they do not serve to clarify and order the more particularized substance
below. The interplay between generality and individuality, deduction and
construction, logic and imagination — this is the profound essence of live
mathematics. Any one or another of these aspects of mathematics can be at the
center of a given achievement. In a far-reaching development all of them will
be involved. Generally speaking, such a development will start from the
“concrete” ground, then discard ballast by abstraction and rise to the lofty
layers of thin air where navigation and observation are easy; after this flight
comes the crucial test of landing and reaching specific goals in the newly
surveyed low plains of individual “reality.” In brief, the flight into abstract
generality must start from and return to the concrete and specific." Richard
Courant

"If the hallowed maximum likelihood principle leads us to difficulties, maybe
some other principle will save us. There is indeed such a principle. It is as
follows: *Basic Principle 0*. Don’t trust any principle. This applies in
particular to the principles and recommendations listed below and should be
kept in mind any time one encounters a problem worth studying. Anyway, here are
some other principles [... insert 8 other principles ...]. Counting the Basic
Principle, this makes a total of nine. Confucius had many more, but I tire
easily." Lucien Le Cam - Maximum likelihood: an introduction

"Bloße Tatsachenwissenschaften machen bloße Tatsachenmenschen." (mere
fact-sciences make mere fact-people) Edmund Husserl - Die Krisis (section I.2)

"Het armzalige gepruts dat we overal aantreffen, heet in deze eeuw
'wetenschap'" Imre Kertesz - Kaddisj voor een niet geboren kind (p. 92)

"[...] maar in dat gezag was geen spoor te vinden van het respect dat men voor
waardevolle eigenschappen behoort te hebben, *het berustte, zoals elke vorm van
gezag, alleen op een goed georganiseerde intimidatie.*" Imre Kertesz - Kaddisj
voor een niet geboren kind (p. 98)

"I’d like to hold fast to the idea that identification, to the extent it means
anything, must be defined as a function of model + data, not just of the model.
Sure, with a probability model, you can say that asymptotically you’ll get
identification, but asymptotically we’re all dead, and in the meantime we have
sparseness and separation and all sorts of other issues." Andrew Gelman ([12
Feb
2014](https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2014/02/12/think-identifiability-bayesian-inference/))

"An experimental science is supposed to perform experiments that find
generalities. It's not just supposed to tally up a long list of individual
cases and their unique life histories. That's butterfly collecting." Richard
Lewontin

"So is data analysis the most fundamental thing? Maybe so, but what method of
data analysis? Last I heard, there are many schools. Bayesian data analysis,
perhaps? Not so clear; what’s the motivation for modeling everything
probabilistically? Sure, it’s coherent—but so is some mental patient who thinks
he’s Napoleon and acts daily according to that belief. " Andrew Gelman:
Several reviews of Deborah Mayo’s new book, Statistical Inference as Severe
Testing: How to Get Beyond the Statistics Wars (12/04/19)

"Bayesians are frequentists. What I mean is, the Bayesian prior distribution
corresponds to the frequentist sample space: it’s the set of problems for which
a particular statistical model or procedure will be applied." Andrew Gelman
([17 June
2018](https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2018/06/17/bayesians-are-frequentists/))

"We hebben immers gezien dat dit [het natuurkundige wereldbeeld] weliswaar in
principe geen realiteiten behoeft te loochenen die daar tot dusver geen plaats
in hebben gevonden, maar dat het toch voortdurend moet vechten tegen de
verleiding om dat wel te doen." C. F. von Weisz&auml;cker - Het wereldbeeld in
de fysica (p. 23)

"Hier ligt de moeilijkheid van de wetenschap in het algemeen [...]. Het
praktische voordeel dat zij ons biedt, is dat zij ons steeds meer dingen leert
beheersen, met als resultaat de techniek. Haar gevaar is dat zij ons zo
gemakkelijk afhoudt van de persoonlijke inspanning die onmisbaar is om het
levende contact met het geheel in stand te houden - en het gevolg daarvan is de
ineenstorting van ons wereldbeeld." C. F. von Weisz&auml;cker - Het wereldbeeld
in de fysica (p. 21)

"It will be sufficient to state here my belief that, however much a Bayesian
solution would have simplified the approach to this problem (by calling
everything a conditional probability), it would be most improper for a
scientist to compromise his convictions by resorting to the most expedient
approach to inference for the problem at hand; and a detailed study of the
present problem has, if anything, strengthened my conviction that a Bayesian
approach in this instance would be a gross over-simplification. I am not
prepared to give the true parameters prior probability distributions because I
can see no model which would justify them." A. W. F. Edwards (1970) [Estimation
of the branch points of a branching diffusion process]

"[...] science that exhausts the pity of the gods [...]" Robert Ashley -
Celestial Excursions (Bruno pt. 1) 

"That number is the answer, in the way that numbers answer." Robert Ashley -
The Backyard

"In a subject like philosophy it is really fatal to lose connexion with the
open air of human nature, and to think in terms of shop-tradition only. In
Germany the forms are so professionalized that anybody who has gained a
teaching chair and written a book, however distorted and eccentric, has the
legal right to figure forever in the history of the subject like a fly in
amber. All later comers have the duty of quoting him and measuring their
opinions with his opinion. Such are the rules of the professorial game — they
think and write from each other and for each other and at each other
exclusively. With this exclusion of the open air all true perspective gets
lost, extremes and oddities count as much as sanities, and command the same
attention." William James, quoted in Christopher Fuchs (01/03/11)

"You know, the most amazing thing happened to me tonight. I was coming here,
on the way to the lecture, and I came in through the parking lot. And you won’t
believe what happened. I saw a car with the license plate ARW 357. Can you
imagine? Of all the millions of license plates in the state, what was the
chance that I would see that particular one tonight? Amazing!" Richard Feynman

"Vrije tijd alleen, [...], is daartoe niet voldoende: hiervoor is een
duidelijk overschot aan intellectuele vermogens nodig. [...] Al naar gelang dit
overschot klein of groot is, zijn er talloze niveaus van dat naast het dagelijks
leven te voeren intellectuele leven: van het simpele verzamelen van insekten,
vogels, mineralen of munten tot aan de hoogste prestaties op het gebied van de
po&euml;zie en filosofie." Arthur Schopenhauer - Bepiegelingen over
levenswijsheid (p. 40)

 "From eight o'clock to ten o'clock real biologists work collecting data and
doing science, but then for relaxation they run to the evolutionary playground,
only to return, fortified and reenergized (perhaps relieved) by the gay abandon
of speculation, to the stuff of which science and technology are really made." 
Janis Antonovics

"Ooit zal Louis, dat weet hij zeker, inzicht, overzicht krijgen in al die
onaffe zinnen, toespelingen. Als je goed oplet, waakzaam bent, zullen de
raadsels, die zij kruimelsgewijs in hun moppen en leugens laten ontsnappen, aan
het licht komen, tot op het dunste draadje uitgerafeld worden." Het Verdiet van
Belgi&euml; - Hugo Claus (p. 167)

"[...] But the history of thought proves that each new structure raised by a
man of extraordinary intellect is sure to be pulled down by the succeeding
ones. This constant pulling down and building up is all right as far as
philosophy itself is concerned; for the inherent nature of the intellect, as I
take it, demands it and we cannot put a stop to the progress of philosophical
inquiries any more than to our breathing. But when it comes to the question of
life itself we cannot wait for the ultimate solution to be offered by the
intellect, even if it could do so." D. T. Suzuki in "Zen Buddhism - Selected
Writings of D. T. Suzuki" (p. 8)

"As Bergson has demonstrated, in order to distance ourselves from the
objective world as well as to perceive aspects of it, consciousness does not
'add' anything to the real, but substracts that which is of no interest".
G. D. Adamson - Philosophy in the age of Science and Capital (p. 20)

"[...] The instant conditions scientific thought and representation in its
entirety, introducing a Platonism into science which is, as Bergson writes,
'immanent to the method'." G. D. Adamson - Philosophy in the age of Science and
Capital (p. 40)
